Australia’s weather systems are
changing. Southern Australia receives
much of its rainfall during the cooler
months of the year from low-pressure
systems and cold fronts to the south
of the subtropical high-pressure
ridge. During recent decades, these
systems have become less common
over southern Australia, and are less
likely to produce rainfall when they
do occur, contributing to declines in
cool season rainfall. Mean sea level
pressure is increasing over Australia,
and there has been an increase in the
number of high-pressure systems over
southern Australia, which bring dry,
clear weather and little rainfall. This
increase in surface pressure across
southern latitudes is a known climate
system response to climate change.
There is large variability in the
frequency of individual weather
systems between months and years.
However, many of these trends are
consistent with simulations from
climate models, which demonstrate
that increased greenhouse levels
lead to fewer low-pressure systems
in southern Australia and a stronger
subtropical ridge, but an increase
in the intensity of heavy rainfall,
including from thunderstorms.
Australia’s climate is also strongly
influenced from year to year by various
broadscale climate drivers, such as the
El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO),
the Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) and
the Southern Annular Mode (SAM).
SAM shows a sustained trend towards
more positive conditions from 1950
to the present day, particularly in
summer. The level of ENSO activity
over the past 50 years is higher, with
more significant El Niño and La Niña
events than in the years between
1920 and 1970. However, there is no
clear indication that recent activity
levels are outside the long-term range
of variability, with evidence of high
levels of ENSO activity in the late 19th
and early 20th centuries. There is low
confidence in long-term trends in the
IOD, particularly prior to the 1960s,
although paleoclimate data indicate
that the recent frequency of strong
positive IOD events is high in the
context of multi-century variability.
