Warming oceans, together with an
increase in the frequency, intensity and
duration of marine heatwaves, pose
a significant threat to the long-term
health and resilience of coral reef
ecosystems. Mass coral bleaching
events have occurred with increasing
frequency and extent around the
world since the 1970s, including on
the Great Barrier Reef. Mass bleaching
is a stress response of corals that
occurs primarily due to elevated ocean
temperature. Recovery is possible,
but mortality can occur if the thermal
stress is too severe or prolonged.
Ocean acidification places further
stress on corals.
Four mass coral bleaching events have
occurred on the Great Barrier Reef
over the past 10 years: in 2016, 2017,
2020 and 2022. In 2016, bleaching
was associated with record high sea
surface temperatures, which in turn
led to the largest recorded mass
bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef.
The impact of the 2020 mass bleaching
event appears to be second only to
2016 and was associated with severely
bleached coastal reefs along the entire
2300 km length of the Great Barrier
Reef. The 2022 event was the first time
that mass bleaching has occurred on
the Reef during a La Niña year.
These four recent bleaching events
are associated with marine heatwaves
driven by anthropogenic climate
change. Rapidly recurring bleaching
events do not give the reef ecosystem
time to fully recover.
In 2022, bleaching was also observed
on some reefs on Australia’s west
coast, including Ningaloo Reef.
This was due to warm ocean
temperatures, driven by the 2021–22
La Niña. The region’s last severe
marine heatwave was driven by the
2010–11 La Niña, which resulted in
bleaching being recorded for the first
time on Ningaloo and the closure of
several Western Australian fisheries.
Climate models project more
frequent, extensive, intense and
longer-lasting marine heatwaves in
the future. Worsening impacts on
coral reefs from marine heatwaves are
expected in the future with continued
warming. The intensification of
marine heatwaves is much greater
under high greenhouse gas emission
scenarios. This implies more frequent
and severe coral bleaching events are
likely, leading to the potential loss
of many types of coral and impacts
on reef fisheries. Along with ocean
acidification and nutrient runoff, the
increased severity and frequency
of marine heatwaves are likely to
reduce reef resilience and hinder coral
recovery from future bleaching events.
